---
title: How Likely Is ‘Likely’?
date: 2026-03-10
published: 2026-03-16T10:11:48+00:00
week: 10
charts:
  probabilities-by-age:
    type: line
    title: The Optimism of Youth
    subtitle: Median assigned probability of common phrases by survey respondents’ age
    file: 2026-03-10/probabilities_by_age.csv
    x:
      column: term
      rotateLabels: true
    y:
      title: Probability (%)
      columns: [Under 18, 75+]
    lines: false
    icons:
      75+: fa-solid fa-diamond
      Under 18: fa-solid fa-square
  will-happen-histogram:
    type: stacked-column
    title: Will It Though?
    subtitle: Probability indicated by the phrase “will happen” according to survey respondents
    file: 2026-03-10/will_happen_histogram.csv
    x:
      title: Probability
    y:
      title: Responses
    legend: false
---

This week's data is from a survey about common probability phrases, in which people chose the most likely between pairs of words or phrases and assigned a probability to each word/phrase in the list. Some demographic data was included, including education background, English-speaking background (whether native and/or fluent), and age bracket.

I was curious whether I could find any patterns related to native speaking/fluency, but at least in the exploration I did, nothing notable was coming out. What I *did* find was a more consistent spread correlating to age. This is most clearly demonstrated by pulling out just the youngest and oldest cohorts and lining them up:

{% chart 'probabilities-by-age' %}

The other thing that jumped out at me was this:

{% chart 'will-happen-histogram' %}

Do you see it?

It's not that 100% is the most-picked value for "will happen."

It's how many people said *something else*.

A third of respondents chose something in the 90s, and there is a nonzero number of responses in *every bucket except the 30s*. I did wonder whether there was any correlation to English-speaking background or country of residence on this one in particular, but I couldn't find a significant difference in breakdown across those categories. I guess some people just have a different definition of "will".


## The Queries

Here's my code for the first chart. It's just a pivot after joining and selecting the columns I wanted:

```sql
with probabilities as (
     select term,
            probability,
            age_band

       from respondent_metadata
       join absolute_judgements
      using (response_id)
      where age_band in ('Under 18', '75+')
)

      pivot probabilities
         on age_band
      using median(probability)
   order by "75+", "Under 18"
```

The `order by` at the end just sorted the x-axis so that both series keep a consistent up-and-to-the-left trajectory.

For the histogram, I manually grouped my buckets, creating a `range_start` column in the first CTE that I removed from the final `select` statement, used twice in the `probability_range` derivation and for sorting the final results.

```sql
with probabilities as (
     select term,
            divide(probability, 10) * 10 as range_start, -- Round down to the nearest 10
            case when probability = 100 then '100%'
                 else range_start || '-' || range_start + 9 || '%'
                  end as probability_range

       from absolute_judgements
),

pivoted as (
      pivot probabilities
         on term
      using count(*)
   order by range_start
)

select probability_range, "Will Happen" from pivoted
```

I had a version of this without the pivot—which I'd done first as a way to see this across all the terms. When I'd narrowed down what I was going to use in this post to just "Will Happen", I'd updated this to just use `select` and `where`. But then I noticed that `30-39%` was missing from the chart, since there were no rows left with that value for `probability_range`. So going back to the pivot meant that range was included from other terms that had values there.

An earlier version of the query also had `probability // 10 * 10 as range_start`. This gives the same results. Apparently the syntax highlighter I use on this site treats `//` as a comment (even for SQL), so everything after that was in gray italics. While `//` is comment syntax in a lot of languages, I don't know of any SQL dialect that uses that. I can't rule it out, but I've always used `--`.

Anyway, In DuckDB at least, `//` and `divide` both do an integer division—so dividing and then multiplying by 10 effectively rounds down to the nearest ten. In, say, Snowflake, I could've gotten this with `floor(probability, -1)`, where `-1` is a *negative* number of decimal places. DuckDB's `floor` doesn't have a second argument for some reason; it always rounds to the ones' place.
